

--- Page 1 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Particle Nature of Lignt and The Wave-Particle Duality
Q1.
In 1905 Einstein published his equation for the photoelectric effect.
In 1916 Millikan demonstrated that the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons is
consistent with Einstein's equation.
Millikan's experiments involved using different frequencies of light. These were obtained
using a mercury vapour lamp which produced an emission spectrum with a specific number
of known frequencies.
The diagram shows some energy levels for a mercury atom.
— eV
— —1.56eV
— -LAaTeV
— —2a4heV
— -3.71eV
—— 4 056            scale
— —§.52eV
— -5.746V
— —I10.38 eV
Determine which transition from the -—3.71 eV energy level would produce light of wavelength
6.1 x 10°? m.
(4)
Transition from —-3.71 CV tO .......ccccccccsececseeeceeeeeseeeeeseeeeseeeteeeessaneees
(Total for question = 4 marks)


--- Page 2 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q2.
In a model of a hydrogen atom, it is assumed that the electron behaves like a wave with a de
Broglie wavelength A. The wave associated with the electron forms a standing wave whose
wavelength is equal to the circumference of the circular path.
Calculate the velocity of the electron based on this model.
(3)
AV =1(0) 6: | 0 ia
(Total for question = 3 marks)
Q3.
Which of the following is the SI base unit for the Planck constant?
El A Nam's
Ee    Nms
fC kgm?s*
a    kgm?s
(Total for question = 1 mark)


--- Page 3 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q4.
Radiation of frequency fand wavelength A is emitted when an electron falls from energy
level Eo to energy level E;.
E> — E, is equal to
   A  me
= , ie
   B —
   c #
c
   p
c
(Total for question = 1 mark)
Q5.
In 1990, the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was launched into a low Earth orbit above the
Earth's atmosphere.
The transmission of electromagnetic radiation through the atmosphere is shown on the
graph.
,                              / |
5                       Tt                                       |   |
=          |      ,                         |  |
wavelength / m
State one advantage shown by this graph of positioning a telescope above the atmosphere.
(1)
(Total for question = 1 mark)


--- Page 4 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q6.
The Planck constant is an important universal constant used in the study of wave—particle
duality.
In a demonstration of the photoelectric effect, ultraviolet radiation with a frequency of 2.8 x
101° Hz is incident on the surface of clean zinc. Electrons are released from the surface of
the zinc.
Calculate the maximum velocity of the released electrons.
work function of zinc = 6.9 x 10-79 J
(2)
MaxiMUmM VelOCILY = .........ccceccseeeeeeeeceeeeneeeeseeeseeeeeseeeesneens
(Total for question = 2 marks)
Q7.
The idea of energy quantisation was used to explain the photoelectric effect, first observed
by Heinrich Hertz.
When ultraviolet radiation is shone onto a metal surface, electrons may be released.
A cadmium surface is illuminated with light of wavelength 2.54 x 1077 m.
Calculate the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons released from the surface.
Work function of cadmium = 4.07 eV
(4)


--- Page 5 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Maximum kinetic CNergy = ..........ccsseceeseeeeeeeeeeeeeesseseeseeessessesseeeeseee
(Total for question = 4 marks)
Q8.
An optical microscope uses a beam of visible light. An electron microscope uses a beam of
electrons.
A biologist looked at an animal cell using both microscopes. The two images are shown;
both have the same magnification.
qe ee ee a                    aac el eS ae Se
Ce               2
. A le Ge        ‘pel          Heer ae Pelee eae eae ia
ee Obese Seo ee a
: ee ae           os ee
aa ea                          Ce ees
 ai oo ae                                       Ses  cone te
fea ees iehe ae                                      ee ee
Lees eal. JS Rall - pee
 Cua en Oo
KOO NS Sy                      Se
pis are ge               ee)
awmnwideledu:
An electron in the beam of the electron microscope has a velocity of 2% of the speed of light.
Calculate the de Broglie wavelength of the electron.
(3)
de Broglie Wavelength = ...........cccccscccsssecceeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeeeneeeeneeeens
(Total for question = 3 marks)


--- Page 6 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q9.
* The behaviour of electromagnetic radiation can be described in terms of a photon model or
a wave model.
In the photoelectric effect, electromagnetic radiation is incident on a metal plate and under
certain conditions electrons are emitted.
It is observed that, for a given metal,
o no electrons are emitted if the frequency of the incident radiation is below a certain
threshold frequency.
o electrons are emitted instantaneously if the frequency of the incident radiation is above
a certain threshold frequency.
o the kinetic energy of the emitted electrons depends only on the frequency of the
incident radiation.
Discuss how the photon model of electromagnetic radiation can explain these observations
and why the wave model of electromagnetic radiation cannot.
(6)
(Total for question = 6 marks)


--- Page 7 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com

Q10.
When the light from a star is dispersed to form a spectrum, dark lines are seen at a number
of frequencies. This is known as an absorption spectrum and is caused by the presence of
certain elements in the star.
Explain how the absorption spectrum is created.

(3)

(Total for question = 3 marks)

Qii.
Read the following extract and then answer the questions that follow.
Powdery dust, the by-product of fearsome meteor storms that pounded the Moon, coats
much of the lunar surface. A build-up of this dust could damage sensitive machinery.
Scientists theorise that lunar dust must be electrostatically charged by ultraviolet solar
radiation from the Sun. When ultraviolet radiation hits the Moon's "day side", the half that
faces the Sun, it knocks electrons out of atoms in the lunar soil.
(a) Describe the particle model of ultraviolet radiation that explains how it can "knock
electrons out of atoms".

(3)


--- Page 8 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com

(b) A teacher uses the arrangement below to demonstrate that electrons can be knocked
out of a metal surface in a photocell by visible light.

The arrangement can also be used to measure the maximum kinetic energy of these

electrons.

photocell
(i) Explain how the potential divider circuit can produce a range of values from 0 to 1.5
V on the voltmeter.
(3)


--- Page 9 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
(ii) The potential difference on the voltmeter is increased until the ammeter reading is
zero.

The voltmeter reads 0.6 V at this instant.
State the maximum kinetic energy of the electrons in eV.
(1)
Maximum kinetic CNergy = .........c.csseccceseeseseeceeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeesssesseees OW
(c) Discuss whether the photocell arrangement in part (b) gives a valid demonstration of
how dust particles become charged on the Moon.
(4)
(Total for question = 11 marks)


--- Page 10 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q12.
In an investigation of the photoelectric effect, a metal plate is illuminated with light of different
frequencies.
The graph shows the maximum kinetic energy of emitted electrons at different frequencies.
Max TMM        ifs
kinetic energy                                                                          ae
aw                    frequency

Which line of the table correctly shows the values given by the graph?
  A     Planck comstant.
  B | threshold frequency      Planck constant
 C | threshold frequency     work tunetion
  D  threshold trequency

(Total for question = 71 mark)


--- Page 11 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q13.
Read the passage and answer the question that follows.
Atoms can be promoted into an excited state when they absorb energy. This results in the
release of radiation at a random time. When several atoms are close together a quantum
effect can occur. When one atom emits radiation this affects all the other nearby excited
atoms. The excess energy of many of the atoms is released simultaneously and an intense
flash of light is produced. This effect is called superradiance and can be used to produce
lasers that emit a narrower range of frequencies than conventional lasers.
Superradiance occurs when the distance between atoms is less than the wavelength of the
emitted radiation.
An atom is in the ground state. The atom absorbs 6.2 eV of energy. The distance between
neighbouring atoms is 140 nm.
Deduce whether superradiance can occur.
(3)
(Total for question = 3 marks)
Q14.
Read the passage and answer the question that follows.
Atoms can be promoted into an excited state when they absorb energy. This results in the
release of radiation at a random time. When several atoms are close together a quantum
effect can occur. When one atom emits radiation this affects all the other nearby excited
atoms. The excess energy of many of the atoms is released simultaneously and an intense
flash of light is produced. This effect is called superradiance and can be used to produce
lasers that emit a narrower range of frequencies than conventional lasers.
When superradiance occurs the atoms all absorb the same amount of energy.


--- Page 12 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Explain how this results in all the atoms emitting radiation of a particular frequency.
(5)
(Total for question = 5 marks)
Q15.
The image shows a diffraction pattern observed when a beam of electrons is fired at thin
gold foil.
Sa et
Ce ee a  r
a a re |
eee ae nee
What property of electrons does this observation demonstrate?
fl A they exist in discrete energy levels
i)    they have a negative charge
f C_ their small mass
kl    their wave nature
(Total for question = 71 mark)


--- Page 13 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q16.
The Planck constant can be determined in a school laboratory using light emitting diodes
(LEDs).
An LED emits light when the potential difference (p.d.) across it is large enough to transfer
sufficient energy to an electron to result in the emission of a photon.
The electron must have energy greater than or equal to the photon energy.
The minimum p.d. required to produce light from LEDs emitting different frequencies was
measured by increasing the p.d. from zero until light was first seen.
The graph shows the results.
' EELS SEE EREEEEEEEEE ER EEE  ECEREEEREEEEEELEPE EABECEEEL EE MEREETEE ETE
scatnenes Hobe ESET EE GN  a
See fe a 9 a la
Po cea POSS BE Sa Eee eee Bee ee eee Ee ae see ae
PERE eat  1 BO a a a dB) ce EG:
ih ECE RECEE REET EPCEHEEE EEE CEE EL EEF EEE EO EREED EERE CGRP GT EP HEE CEEPEEL A
A [Ee Gee  CC EEE Oe A   Ee    SEES Be ee
“2 LEE EEE CDEP Eee PPeE Get pre ree rie S8000 05 E OEE RRs Sees Poe Bees eee Cees
ac a OO OO OY Gd nO em Oa ccd
cress                          2 EEE BEAR EEE EEE EEE EEHEHEER CEG BBE BEEBE LEER EREEHE
a          CCEA ee ee
eee eee SER Cees BOERS Re ea a ee Re ee ce AER es ee
er 204 8) ie a ed ed EE a 8 de 8 We
Pe etic | 22S Pe ERE ee Sa ee ee ee BS ee I
a        HERG ee Bl a 7 6 Ol
aC aoe                    A Ha Ed ad GG Et i 0 Gil Ba et i, ad i Ge a cd hl ly a i al dG Gna il, ld
= 280. PERSE RS CEE EE CEO Peet Sere: pace e OEE ED Eee eSee ret eee Ger erre
a         HESEd sues satertesar conventert stant cctesiereucana:terigatet wear tastes
me... Ae eT De ete ee ee prope Pe de Teepe] bapa bode | TT Weber TT Pe fetsteT a | effet ie Paper Ppl oPere Tf
220 ee ee es
a al el red red re ee ed ts de ed Keds dd rea Ak edd dP Pe, PD
ol         EE a ee te ed le ld
ee See N ee ee de ee A aE eee ae eee ee a
Pee | SP OG CGT = COG GARG OR Od GG Cd
a it See eee ee eS $d dE I PE dk EO Fl WO
Ae 2eddd SOGGy OGaG SSS cS cRaee SAGs ee Sees ooce ae CEREEEEECEEAEEEE PEE ECE
ists Je at  Ae Ler | leleeePr ler rr | lbe Wel beer) terre] Pieler Lt blend [eeleie) [tery Te
 Co eee I
2 ee ee ee ee ee ee Ree ee eee eee
Prequeneyy! 10-7
Determine the value of the Planck constant given by this graph.
(4)
Value of Planck constant given by Graph = ...........cccceeeccccseeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeesaeeeeeaneeeessaes
(Total for question = 4 marks)


--- Page 14 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q17.
(a) Solar sails are a form of propulsion for spacecraft. The sail is made of a thin sheet of
reflective material. When photons of light from the Sun reflect from the material a force is
exerted on the sail. The photons reflect with a momentum equal to their initial momentum but
in the opposite direction.
(i) Show that a single photon of frequency 1.5 x 107° Hz has a momentum of about 3 x
10°’ Ns.
(2)
(ii) Hence determine the momentum transferred to the solar sail by this photon.
(1)
Momentum transferred = ...........ccccceeccceeeeeceeeeceeeeceeseeseeeeseeeesseeees
(b) An alternative method of producing a momentum change is being investigated.
Researchers have suggested that ‘larger changes in momentum could be produced by
directing laser light at graphene oxide’. Electrons are emitted from the graphene oxide
surface, resulting in a force being exerted on the graphene oxide in the opposite direction.
A researcher has suggested that one possible mechanism for the emission of the
electrons is the photoelectric effect.
(i) Show that the maximum velocity for a photoelectron emitted after absorption of a
photon of light of frequency 1.5 x 10'° Hz is about 8 x 10°ms™.
work function of graphene oxide = 6.7 x 10-'9 J
(3)
(ii) Hence calculate the momentum of the photoelectron.
(2)
Momentum of photoelectron = 000... eccecccccecceceeeeeeeeeteeeeeseeeeseeeeaaees


--- Page 15 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
(c) Explain whether the suggestion in (b) that ‘larger changes in momentum could be
produced by directing laser light at graphene oxide' is true.

(2)
(Total for question = 10 marks)
Q18.
A solar panel uses electromagnetic radiation from the Sun to generate electricity.
In one installation a sensor in the solar panel measures the intensity of radiation arriving
from different directions. A motor rotates the solar panel so that it always faces the brightest
part of the sky.
When light is incident on an LDR, electrons move to a higher energy level where they
become conduction electrons. This causes the resistance of the LDR to decrease.
A student suggests that this is an example of the photoelectric effect. The student is not
correct.
Compare and contrast the photoelectric effect with the effect of radiation incident on an LDR.
(6)
(Total for question = 6 marks)


--- Page 16 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q19.
In 1905 Einstein published his equation for the photoelectric effect.
In 1916 Millikan demonstrated that the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons is
consistent with Einstein's equation.
Discuss the extent to which our current understanding of observations of the photoelectric
effect supports the idea that light behaves as photons rather than as waves.
(6)

(Total for question = 6 marks)
Q20.
The diagram shows apparatus that can be used to investigate the photoelectric effect.

\                   _ metal plate
a       (uA)


--- Page 17 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Light is shone onto the metal plate.
For a particular metal there will only be a current for frequencies of light greater than 8.17 x
10‘ Hz.
lf the applied potential difference is reversed and increased, the current will decrease and at
a certain value of potential difference the current will be zero.
Calculate this potential difference when the frequency of the incident light is 9.62 x 1014 Hz.
(4)
Potential difference = ..........cccccceccceeccsseeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeseeeeeeesnaaeees
Q21.
The photoelectric effect provides evidence for the particle nature of electromagnetic
radiation.
Which of the following observations of the photoelectric effect could also be explained using
the wave nature of electromagnetic radiation?
Fl A The emission of photoelectrons is instantaneous.
a    The maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons depends on frequency.
kl C_ The rate of emission of photoelectrons depends on intensity.
Fl    There is a minimum frequency for emission of photoelectrons to occur.
(Total for question = 1 mark)


--- Page 18 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q22.
A student has been learning about the photoelectric effect.
The student was asked by his teacher to explain the photoelectric effect. He gave the
following explanation:
 cighe above a certain thresholol is alole to {ree
| electrons trom a metal, because the light oives
| enerayy to electyoms bw the mecal.
| Some of this enera ji4 is used to release the
___| electrons from the metal anc the rest becomes _
____| Ietinetto energy of the freed electron,
a
Discuss whether the student's answer fully explains the photoelectric effect.
(4)
(Total for question = 4 marks)


--- Page 19 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q23.
When light is incident on the surface of a metal, electrons may be emitted by the
photoelectric effect. Observations of the photoelectric effect helped to establish that light can
exhibit particle behaviour.
Which of the following observations of the photoelectric effect could also be explained by
light behaving as a wave?
El A Emission of photoelectrons occurs immediately the surface is illuminated.
4    Photoelectrons are only emitted when the frequency of the light is more than a
certain minimum value.
kl C The maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons is independent of the intensity of
the incident light.
Fa    When the intensity of the incident light increases, photoelectrons are emitted at a
greater rate.
(Total for question = 71 mark)
Q24.
A student has been learning about the photoelectric effect.
This experiment demonstrates the particle nature of light.
Explain what is meant by the particle nature of light.
(2)
(Total for question = 2 marks)
Q25.


--- Page 20 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Read the extract and answer the question that follows.
In the 17th century there were two proposed theories to explain the refraction of light. Using
a wave model, Huygens stated that light slows down when it passes from air to water. Using
a particle model, Newton stated that light soeeds up when it passes from air to water.
Newton's theory was more readily accepted until the speed of light in water was measured in
the 19th century.
In the early 20th century, Einstein used observations from the photoelectric effect to provide
evidence for the particle model of light.
Nowadays, both the wave model of light and the particle model of light are accepted, as
each can be used to explain different aspects of the behaviour of light.
In a demonstration of the photoelectric effect, electromagnetic radiation is shone onto a
clean metal surface. It can be shown that the metal loses negative charge when the radiation
has a frequency above a certain threshold frequency.
Explain how the particle model of light is consistent with this observation.
(3)
(Total for question = 3 marks)
Q26.
Which of the following provides evidence for the particle model of electromagnetic radiation?
fl A diffraction
Ee    interference
Fl C_ polarisation
a    visible line spectra
(Total for question = 1 mark)


--- Page 21 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q27.
In 2016 the Breakthrough Starshot initiative was announced. This project intends to send a
fleet of small probes to Proxima Centauri, the nearest star to the Sun. This journey would
take about twenty years.
The composition of a star can be determined by analysis of its absorption spectrum.
Explain why there are certain specific frequencies missing from the spectrum.
(5)
(Total for question = 5 marks)
Q28.
When monochromatic light is incident on the surface of a metal, electrons are emitted by the
photoelectric effect.
lf other conditions are unchanged, the maximum kinetic energy of the electrons will be
increased by
fl A __ increasing the frequency of the incident light.
Fl    increasing the intensity of the incident light.
fl C using a metal with a higher threshold frequency.
Ee    using a metal with a higher work function.
(Total for question = 71 mark)


--- Page 22 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com

Q29.
Some of the energy levels of an atom of a gas are shown.

-1.5eV                    ¥

—3.4eV¥
During which transition, A, B, C or D, is electromagnetic radiation with the shortest
wavelength emitted?
A
Ac

(Total for question = 71 mark)
Q30.
An electron beam is directed onto crystalline graphite. A fluorescent screen on the other side
of the crystal shows the pattern in Figure 1. The brighter areas correspond to higher electron
intensity.
The speed of the electrons is increased and the resulting pattern is shown in Figure 2.
Lh | | | ll                                | @ }
\ Bee                                     =
Figure 1                                              Figure 2


--- Page 23 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Discuss the conclusions that can be drawn from this information about the behaviour of
electrons and the structure of graphite.
.
(Total for question = 6 marks)

Q31.
The photograph shows a school spectrometer.

Soci Amp:                          AOL TACHON, Gratis.                       “telescopes

ei need tl ra eee Pe ee ee eee:

a il  (| O80 te eh Ae ee ee Su pee ee epee

= a I  HI ee ee ee | — —

Wess Se ee ee et AED   epee | eer a ee ea ee ees

ee ae fa ee ee | i oe eC ee ee ee

ee ae ee ee ee


--- Page 24 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
The spectrometer allows parallel rays of light to be passed through a diffraction grating and
the resulting angles of diffraction to be measured.

The spectrometer and diffraction grating are used to analyse the light from a sodium lamp. In
the sodium lamp, sodium is heated until it becomes a vapour and an electric current is
passed through it. The vapour then emits light.
After the light passes through the diffraction grating a line spectrum is observed.
(i) Explain why only certain wavelengths are observed.
(6)
(ii) Diffraction gratings with the following spacings are available:
panos [ie [ar [oe [as
Explain which would be the best spacing to use to measure the diffraction angle for the
third order maximum for yellow light of wavelength 589 nm.
(3)
(Total for question = 9 marks)


--- Page 25 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q32.
Barnard's star is a red dwarf star in the vicinity of the Sun. The wavelength of a line in the
spectrum of light emitted from Barnard's star is measured to be 656.0 nm. The same light
produced by a source in a laboratory has a wavelength of 656.2 nm.
Visible light from the star originates from the photosphere. In the photosphere of Barnard's
star, hydrogen and helium atoms are at a temperature of 3100 K.
(i) Calculate the mean kinetic energy of an atom in the photosphere at a temperature of
3100 K.
(2)
Mean kinetic CN€rgy = ..........cccseecceeeeceeeeeeeeeeneeeeseeeeeseueeneeeenes
(ii) Describe how these atoms emit visible light.
(2)
(Total for question = 4 marks)


--- Page 26 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q33.
A fine-beam tube is used for investigating properties of electrons.
An electron beam is produced inside a spherical glass bulb. The bulb contains neon gas ata
very low pressure.
* Interactions between electrons and the neon atoms in the tube make the beam visible.
Part of the spectrum of visible light produced by these interactions is shown.
(Source: © MoFarouk/Shuttersteck)
Explain the process that results in the emission of this spectrum. Your answer should include
reference to
energy levels in atoms.
(6)
(Total for question = 6 marks)


--- Page 27 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q34.
Our understanding of the atom has developed over time, from early models in which atoms
were considered to be hard incompressible spheres, through to the nuclear model of the
atom and the ladder model in which electrons exist in a discrete number of allowed energy
states.
In the energy ladder model of the atom, electrons exist in a discrete number of allowed
energy states. The collision of electrons with gold atoms may lead to the production of high
frequency electromagnetic radiation.
Explain how high frequency electromagnetic radiation may be produced when electrons
collide with atoms in a metal.
(4)
(Total for question = 4 marks)


--- Page 28 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q35.
Filament and fluorescent are two types of light bulb.
Filament light bulbs contain a tightly coiled wire filament, surrounded by an inert gas and
encased in a thin glass bulb. When the potential difference (p.d.) across the bulb is
sufficient, the filament heats up, emitting visible light.
Fluorescent light bulbs use a long tube of glass containing a small amount of mercury. When
a sufficient p.d. is applied across the ends of the tube, electrons moving through the tube
cause the mercury to become a vapour and emit photons in the ultraviolet part of the
electromagnetic spectrum. The collisions of these photons with the phosphor coating of the
tube result in the emission of photons of visible light.
filament     All ‘gh            eee
is ! ‘ ye)                             Gee
Filament bulb                                           Fluorescent bulb
(i) Explain how the wire in the filament lamp gets hot when a p.d. is applied.
(2)
(ii) Explain how the fluorescent bulb emits photons when sufficient p.d is applied.
(2)
(Total for question = 4 marks)


--- Page 29 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q36.
An electron travels at a velocity v.
Which of the following is the correct expression for the de Broglie wavelength A of the
electron?
 s 1k    3.00 % LO®
 B 1= G1llxif"' xv
fel Ite A. 3.00 We ig?
 Cle   6.63 x 10-*
 D i= S11lxll" xy
(Total for question = 1 mark)
Q37.
The diagram shows the lowest energy levels for a certain atom.
| Od
2. ————.J§ Sm __ 1s eV
| Aa 3 2 2
eround state ——HHH4HHWW___ _545e¥
A photon with energy 3.2 eV is absorbed.
An electron could move from
(1)
fl A ground state to level 1.
a    ground state to level 2.
El C level 1 to ground state.
Fl    level 2 to ground state.
(Total for question = 1 mark)


--- Page 30 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q38.
In a spectrometer, light from a tube of hot gas is passed through a diffraction grating.
The diagram shows the Zero order and the first order maxima for the line spectrum
produced.
first order                   aero                   first order
         a      —      order      .         A
Explain why lines of different wavelengths are produced by the gas.
(4)
Q39.
When a large potential difference is applied to a discharge tube, the gas in the discharge
tube emits coloured light. When this light is passed through a diffraction grating, an emission
spectrum which is made up of a series of lines of different wavelengths may be seen.
The photographs show the spectra produced from a tube containing hydrogen and a tube
containing helium.
Hydrogen:


--- Page 31 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Helium:
a
* Explain why different elements produce spectra containing different specific wavelengths of
light.
(6)


--- Page 32 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q40.
The energy level diagram shows four possible energy transitions for an electron in an atom.
n=3—{|
- TTL    Tl.
ground state n= 1    A B © D
Which arrow shows the transition made by the electron when the atom emits radiation with
the longest wavelength?
a A
Ac
a
(Total for question = 71 mark)
Q41.
The diagram represents some of the energy levels for an atom.
= 3. —- A  — _ _-1 58 ee
n = 4 —______________).55 eV
a2. = 3-1. 85 eV
a= 3-15] eV


--- Page 33 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Calculate the lowest frequency of light that would be absorbed by an electron with
energy —0.85 eV in the atom shown.
(3)
FEQUENCY = .......cccsecceeseeeceeeeceeeeeceeeeeeueeseaeeeseeeeneneess
(Total for question = 3 marks)
Q42.
The photograph shows a school spectrometer.
Socata ap             dRASHion: Beaty.           “LES!
Ne | foe         ae ee
EL  I  7° SSS ee, BS ee ee ee eee ee ee Saye
Ege a  ehh Janel RR SURRR  Pee e a a
se a eS
a ee a ee ee ee ee
The spectrometer allows parallel rays of light to be passed through a diffraction grating and
the resulting angles of diffraction to be measured.


--- Page 34 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMathsTutor.com
The diagram shows some of the energy levels in a sodium atom.
1.39 eV
—1.52 6V
— -1.95 &V
— —3.04 eV
— -§.14 eV
Add an arrow to the diagram to show the transition involved in the emission of yellow light of
wavelength 589 nm.
Show your working below.
(4)
(Total for question = 4 marks)


--- Page 35 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q43.
An electron in its ground state absorbs electromagnetic radiation of wavelength A.
The energy level diagram represents the resulting energy transition of the electron.
nu=3 a —H5eV
n=2 -
srouned state =; o> dh] el
The electron eventually returns to its ground state.
Explain, with reference to the energy level diagram, how this may result in the emission of
radiation with a longer wavelength than A.
(3)
(Total for question = 3 marks)


--- Page 36 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com

Q44,
The diagram shows five energy levels in an atom.
Electromagnetic radiation is incident on the atom.
Which transition would be caused by the absorption of the lowest frequency of radiation?
  A 1to5
   1 to 2
  C 4to5
   5 to 4

(Total for Question = 1 mark)
Q45.
Einstein's photoelectric equation states

APS @ ty MV

The quantity denoted by  ® is the minimum
El A amount of energy of a photon needed to release an electron.
Fa    amount of energy of an electron needed to release a photon.
Fl C frequency of a photon needed to release an electron.
kl    frequency of an electron needed to release a photon.

(Total for question = 71 mark)


--- Page 37 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q46.
In 1965, Richard Feynman proposed a double slit experiment to investigate the wave
properties of electrons.
The experiment was later carried out using the arrangement shown.
|                    detector
beam of clectroms   |
A beam of electrons was directed at a barrier with two slits.
The detector recorded the positions where electrons arrived after passing through the slits.
The following pattern was obtained. Black dots represent points where electrons were
detected. A band where electrons were not detected has been labelled X and a band where
electrons were detected has been labelled Y.
_ Rie ew ee:  eo es  a  apace cs | ee
Pecan ed hee  fa eT eM Je  STUPOR TAe eed? | Stecmuee meiaiuerbet sn  ee ie Sie
Se vele: sega ake Sac et eee ic her em eee
“ES ReCe Ge CL OUNeR ee   ee ee ea  He
SUSE eae | Rs: EN ge iob:  een,
as  se Meg are  oe Oe ae  heen tes
ae ee ee  ogni: Sea!
ce age od  CRE Mre SO teeeeeerenen rae: | ieee emer: Lane ame: ET
PEE   Sey 2s See ad eae ates  Te meeMare tay
CS! OU ee ee He ta
nay Hane eee ae WES ]   ie age 2S ee   PRR ce ee Uh Sea noe A ar   Ue ae ne icin,
om ee  ne fea stot: TEE Rae eee ie Sone?  gee mabe
ee ee Renee ALS Oeeaees, OS emg: ens aeea eg et!
ee Me oe ae a
ee os  Sages, Put ea    ee
vy Ree cre eaten   pacar ie er a Nee  ge ea df A ee eT ne   ae ae tise    yes Se ae
ie tie ire ee a am no et ec mre To a Cr ee ee   1 ee game ean 7
“eee  “Sa seeteegeeater der seetiadbiereegh cee: = Sia a aaa ake   se cata am
SSC Raer hy coe “SR eneeeuesi, 6 MS cohoe
AE “Egat Uae. ee   Ce es
, ENE gh  sah OU aaa 8  eee Ce etaihaeemrcgeey  : Re or
[AAI ee | Oe | Eu eR ea
oe cacti eres gee  Bie a A ars a Us tere cy Eat faire Vepiataoay vicky Re EE a
Pee: Ee Gye eee Oo Sa
The path difference for electrons arriving at band X from the separate slits was 2.5 x 107’ m.
For electrons arriving at band Y the path difference was 5.0 x 107’ m.


--- Page 38 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Explain why this pattern is observed when the electron energy is 9.6 x 1071 J.
The electrons are travelling at non-relativistic speeds.
(6)
(Total for question = 6 marks)


--- Page 39 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q47.
A student has been learning about the photoelectric effect.
The student sets up a circuit to investigate the photoelectric effect.
_y light
a
photocell              Se
/     i
The student illuminates the photocell with light of known frequency f. A current is produced in
the circuit due to the emitted electrons. He adjusts the potential difference, using a potential
divider, until the reading on the milliammeter is Zero and records the corresponding reading
V; on the voltmeter. He repeats this procedure for other frequencies of light.
When the reading on the milliammeter is zero the maximum kinetic energy of the emitted
electrons is given by eVs.
Explain how the student can use his results to determine a value for the Planck constant h
using a graphical method.
(5)
(Total for question = 5 marks)


--- Page 40 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q48.
The photoelectric effect was discovered by Hertz who investigated the effect of ultraviolet
radiation incident upon the surface of zinc. The effect was found to depend on the frequency
of the radiation.
(a) State what is meant by threshold frequency.
(1)
(6b) Light of frequency 8.9 x 10'4 Hz is incident upon the surface of a different metal.
The photoelectrons have a maximum speed of 6.7 x 10° ms“.
Calculate the work function of the metal in eV.
(4)
Work fUNCtION = ........cccceeeccceececeeeeceeeetseeeeseeeesseeesseeeessees OV
(Total for question = 5 marks)


--- Page 41 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q49.
In the 19th century experiments with magnetic and electric field deflections were used to
determine the charge to mass ratio of electrons.
Later experiments showed the diffraction of electrons as they passed through thin metal
foils.
Deduce what these experiments tell us about electrons.
(3)
(Total for question = 3 marks)


--- Page 42 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q50.
Read the extract and answer the question that follows.
In the 17th century there were two proposed theories to explain the refraction of light. Using
a wave model, Huygens stated that light slows down when it passes from air to water. Using
a particle model, Newton stated that light soeeds up when it passes from air to water.
Newton's theory was more readily accepted until the speed of light in water was measured in
the 19th century.
In the early 20th century, Einstein used observations from the photoelectric effect to provide
evidence for the particle model of light.
Nowadays, both the wave model of light and the particle model of light are accepted, as
each can be used to explain different aspects of the behaviour of light.
In the 1920s, experiments demonstrating diffraction of electrons confirmed de Broglie's work
on the wave nature of particles.
In one such experiment an electron had a momentum of 4.8 x 10°** kg ms‘.
Measurements confirmed that the de Broglie wavelength of the electron was 1.40 x 10779 m.
Deduce that these observations are consistent with the value of h given on the data sheet
provided.
(3)
(Total for question = 3 marks)


--- Page 43 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q51.
In 1905 Einstein published his equation for the photoelectric effect.
In 1916 Millikan demonstrated that the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons is
consistent with Einstein's equation.
Millikan used his data to obtain a value of the Planck constant.
The following graph of maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons against frequency was
produced from his data for the photoelectric effect using lithium.
CEEEEEEHE ECPEEPPPREE REET EV EERE A EERE ERCP EE ELEE EREL Ty
as       a BI  BoeueSeuee  le a 9 ed ld UO i)
ee COED BR ee Be See ee ee es Os ER
pi aeeeed (sadaadeecensneaaaad seceaeuaac cececeesns geass eee: aegacenen,
=       Fenesuuvstssuee2gus8 1eeudEuSgGsNueHeGEEEuSauSENy 23 tmageauaEE
Se Mee el es Ne tt a te a A
Se ee  [REGS GER ee ee a ee ee es
see.      eee] Pe Pee eo) eee eel Pe fe ed Pe) pple I  ae Teebeep et BaD babe Ref h Pele
OR ceececaemececee dace aeceaemca! daeneceee co sgeecee gerccence
pat |        eeag beams gouh og bau eee tenons case7cecee anaes cuees seennecaae
“A ow ae | ERED EEE ope Pole eT Perse fe pleh ba EEEBE TEER CEE EEE BEELER EEE ECE
we Sat a Rm WE EA
Sead (ceadoacies ueteeaasad coneusrodaaaceeceeee suace auees ceeds ceeae
A   mee.     Ba nO 6 BG Be a
E   a EEE Perea REGED eee ET Srp he HEE Rian AP ees SSeS tetel Ta
eae Poe ee ea eee ee ee PRBER ERAS AOA eee
FE eee et ad yo et a A a i a i ta
= Wage!" ieTe. [ele dele tale labet lt ele ele We oll Ia) eee all slalelal ele liebe) [okie aE Tebey
amma EO 5 8 Ge et Gi dN el BB
i
Frequeney flO" Ez:
Millikan suggested that the uncertainty from his results for lithium was as little as 1%.
Determine whether the value of the Planck constant obtained from this graph is within 1% of
the value stated on the data sheet for this examination paper.
(3)
(Total for question = 3 marks)


--- Page 44 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q52.
In the 1920s Louis de Broglie proposed that an electron could behave as a wave.
Calculate the wavelength of an electron that is travelling at a speed of 2.2 x 10’ms“.
(3)
Wavelength = ..........ccccceseecseeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeesneeeess
(Total for question = 3 marks)
Q53.
In 1925 Franck and Hertz were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics "for their discovery of
the laws governing the impact of an electron upon an atom".
In one of their experiments, a beam of high-speed electrons is fired through mercury
vapour.
An electron in the beam collides with a mercury atom, which becomes excited. The atom
returns to its initial state by emitting electromagnetic radiation of a single frequency.
Explain why excited atoms only emit certain frequencies of radiation.
(5)
(Total for question = 5 marks)


--- Page 45 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q54.
The Planck constant is an important universal constant used in the study of wave—particle
duality.
Atomic electrons are confined within the atom. One model of atomic electrons suggests that
the wave associated with an atomic electron forms a standing wave that fits exactly into the
diameter d of the atom.
(i) The diagram shows the lowest frequency standing wave that fits into the diameter of the
atom.
aw abo
| /      ;      i"
! < > ‘the lowest frequency
 ee | standing wawe
Calculate the momentum of the electron.
d= 2.00 x 10-°m
(3)
MOMENtUM & 2.0... ..ccceeccceeeceeeeceeteeeeeeeseeeeaueeseeeseeeeaes
(ii) Electrons in an atom can only exist at discrete energy levels.
Explain how this standing wave model can account for this.
(2)
(Total for question = 5 marks)


--- Page 46 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
In an experiment to determine the wavelength of light, a diffraction grating is illuminated with
light from a monochromatic source. A series of bright spots is observed.

The experiment is repeated and the distance between consecutive bright spots increases.
Select the row of the table that gives two changes to the experimental set up which would
both cause the distance between consecutive bright spots to increase.
(1)
Number af slits per mminthe |} _.     ot ea ded
a, ~~ _ P  oe  :     Wavelength of the light source
diffraction grating                         |                )
            Decreased                       Tncreased
  D              Decreased                       Decreased
(Total for question = 71 mark)
Q56.
In an investigation of the photoelectric effect, electromagnetic radiation of frequency fwas
directed onto a metal plate. The maximum kinetic energy E of the photoelectrons emitted
from the metal plate was determined. The procedure was repeated for a range of
frequencies.
The graph shows how E depended upon f.
20 TEEEICLEAEA GE) PER EE AGE EEE EEE er ee. rt SR Bel eee RES
Ope amuea Pee ER EE Beaseeceoaeae aceee ERERaG BLU PERER EL ip
edt dt  See EEE BEER RRiReoee ESSE] EEEEEE Ty
1eEEELIEL EERE PERSE Mb E TE SPs Scie min ae fers ttorete le] Ee es a
Ee, el Be: i 9 al ee
(BSREE AREER ESS GEE AO EBs Bea es Pe Bee a ee
i SERRE HESS ESSE Soe as er ate Pe eee eee eet
jk a a
coop bed
OO WET Pee ER EET TTA TA [eGo ie def le ee ee TD Doel TERE Def Wee lt Pe Pe [ex [eal
eee Bee ee Oe ee ee eee
(BR Ge Pease OMe ee ORE ee a ee es aaa
Ne Et tt et i a
Sd 9 ed EG td dE  BSS S ESSE Sse aee EER e ee
Se |
fe a a Fd a et Ge Gs Gel at Gl ed Gd a
douse. ae I ab ge used Guanes Goeu: age se0ee sueauuauee seaueegura cusaceeaaa |
ak mm es St
see et        THs f “CEH SE Eee EEE SLHERE SERRE SSE Ga oem
| a WR Bp Gd Gd GG WE GY,
9G dN OS 9
ARBGE Pune cee Geemas cage deeb cedaaaeen eemacagen vuecsee7ac|
[eb BEECEEE PEPPER ECE eT PCE BE CLEP EEE TEDER OEEL ERE EERE LEEPEEEE TE
ceggyie: AEE SRSP IED EEE | DRE EE REE OED EREEe See Bee eee oe EG
ec Ge BO GN dl et 0 GB CO
wes spe Ce uece ence cece: casa’ cecce caeasaeeee 2 el et EG Ed) eB: EE
HEBER EEE SERRE Rs SEES SEES ASE Rees ee ee ee
page guoos gecas Geaee gaged ganee cogae co as\reeeegsees sungegaced|
9 td CN 6 GeO a Oi CMG D9 dG 0
ae OS
QE Eten: GC tC Gt GG 2 GB 2
50:         60:         70°        80         ‘OG         TOG:        6
fetO8HR


--- Page 47 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Determine a value for the Planck constant, h, in J s.
(4)
(Total for question = 4 marks)
Q57.
In an investigation of the photoelectric effect, electromagnetic radiation of frequency fwas
directed onto a metal plate. The maximum kinetic energy E of the photoelectrons emitted
from the metal plate was determined. The procedure was repeated for a range of
frequencies.
The graph shows how E depended upon f.
20 TEESE EEE EL LAE EDEL. Er SS
ye Ee ft Ped FF EG PE Ot Pe Gl Fe GG EE lke cm Gr Gn OB Oy ta nF GO Pl cP Fl
dl SE ee ee eee eee geet cocedcccees Be
ve EEGEZPEESE EEE ESCH SPSS EEESE ea ep abet 2 beeps fe
Se On
Ed 7 8 A
ESEEEEEEE HERE ee eC bos eters eh PE ep EEE R foc cctectetet
iseieeane, asee TOD EBCECECRIPEREE GET EIMEER Ei tpbrick erento tart EEL ELEECEEEEE DE eeert
i PERCE PEER REED EEEEE Bere CUEEELE EEE PEELE EP EEE EEE PEt
| a PL EPR BAP Ore DARED ls bey eke pe Pe iD babes Re PhP eT EADS bey debe be pap bobs etal:
9G dN OS 9
[aneeGeuee! samaeceeer ;caaeauece cue qaueeue cuamacagenseeseaeaaa|
egies Ale SEE ECEEH PEECUCLSED CECE CGEL GEE EE EEE Ga CeEL ECE RSE RerEre tt,
AE Tela RAGA EAE ETE GIG Eee eee Sy Pa) tel tele Wel eee Peele el :
IT Oe ee ee TTT TTT TTT rar tT
jf a BRL CER EE HEE ER EEE EERE EEE EEL BRIERE EEE HERRERA :
Berea eo, sl BB ah
pio hie


--- Page 48 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
The table gives data for different metal surfaces.
     Work function /eV
Deduce which metal was being used in the investigation.
(3)
(Total for question = 3 marks)


--- Page 49 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Mark Scheme — Particle Nature and The Wave-particle Duality
Qi.
Cuestion     1                                      Get ts                      eccl
                 Acceptable answers                                     Additional uidamce
ae wm ng                             Fuample or calculation       _
 Useofe=f                            =4.91 x 10" Hz
SSE OG ie                       @) |£=663™ 1g Ts “4.91 x 10° Hz
« Apply conversion factor of 1.6        = 35.26% 10 ee de ne,
<10- for photon energy from              36x10" T/ 16x ie Cc=2 04 eV
joey                                           (1) | Level =-3.71 eV - 204 eV =-5.75 eV
o Level=-§5.74 (eV)                 rah)                                                      4
Q2.
number            Acceptable answers
o Calculates wavelength 4            Rxample of calculation:
(emeumiference) (1)                  A= 2#nr= am™ 4.35% 10- en = 3.453 ™  Lol! tm
o Use of p= hid (I)                     A= Abe sow = Fafie.
eo p=22* 10’ ms" (1)               v= 6.63x 10 J 3/1107! kex3.33x10" m)              3
v=21BR x ime!                                                       :
Q3.
Incorrect Amswers:
A —W is not an SI base unit and incorrect arramzement
B —W is not an SI base wnt
|                           TD — imoorrect arrangement
Q4.
Question | Answer                                                                               Mark
Bunaber
I B= a
Q5.
                          Acceptable Answer                                         Additiomal (suidamece
o Stars emitting infra-red                                    Accept identitted wavelength range
radiation can be detected above
the atmosphere
Or Some visible wavelengths           (1)                                                                                    1
enutted by stars reduced ta
30% intensity of less. by the
atmosphere


--- Page 50 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q6.
                    Acceptable Amswers                                             Additional suidance
° Use of hf =@+ =m?                  (1)   Example of Calculation
eo woe te (ii an oll                    (1)
oe v= 63x 10" ms                               E, = (6.63% 10-4 Js x 2.8 x 10! gy -
69~ 10-4" (1) = Leer 12 x 1o-" J
_  [2x LFavlaxuo-t] We we                   9
‘LG? me!
Q7.
Queshonm          \       _                                            ae          og                          7
Number            Acceptable amswers                                    Additional gumlance                             Mark
o Use ofc and 2—Af(1) | Byample of calculation:
o Converts eto J (DD          E- he _ 6.63% 10 Isx3x10' ms” x10  Jsx3x 10"ms   =F.831x 10" 3
o Use of B= A+ Ee (1)
Work function = 6.51 x 10 J
o KEen=13~ 10" 7 (1)
KE, = 7-83 x10 J- 6.51% 10-19) =1.32x10"°)             4
Q8.
Question                     Acceptable Answers                                                        Additional cutdamce                             Ward:
Number
® seofp = mr                           Exzaniple of calculatiom,
with m= 9.11 x 10-™*                    |                                  |
and vy = 0.02 x 3,0 x 10°          aly | 4                 6.63 x 10-"*]s
° Useofa="                        (iy | 9-11 x 10-#* kg > 0.02 x 3.0 x 10° ms~*      3
oe aA-lew io"? im.                   (1)    Aal2x io" til                                           :


--- Page 51 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                                              PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q9.
Nim ler
of            This question assesses a student's ability to          The following table shows how the marks
show a coherent anc logical structured answer | should be awarded for structure and limes of
with linkage and fully-custamed reasoning.              Teasonmine
Iiarks ane awarded for indicative content and                                                      Mumber of marks
for how the answer as structured and shows                                                            awarded for
lines of reasoning.                                                                                                       structure and lines
The following table shows how the marks                                                          of Teasomime
should be awarded for maicative content.              Answer showe a                       -
Number af                      Number of marks,               coherent and logical
indicative pomts              awarded                            structure with
SFFH 1 ANSE                tmichcahiwe pomts                 linkage aac folly
      sustained lines of
Particle model                                                  stmctured with
® (One photon imferacts with one                some linkages and
electron                                                                     lines of reascumne
e And each photon has enersy                   Answer has no                        0
proportional te the frequency, Or               lmkage between
reference to E=hy                                  pots and as
® The electronis emitted (instantly)              wnstroctured
cally ifthe eneroy of the photon 1s
sreater than the work fixmetion (of the | Limkage marks
‘Ox The electron 1s emutted (instantly)
only ifthe energy of the photon is                poluts                                 marks                                        6
areater than the energy needed for an
electron to break free (from metal
« Ase photon enerey over and above           from both naooclels,                  2
the work function is gamed by the
electron as kinetic enersy
Wave model
® Ttwould be expected that the eneray
of the electron would build up and
eventually be enorttedd
e The (netic) energy of the (enutted)
electrons would depend on the
intensity of the wave (and mot the
frequency)


--- Page 52 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                                              PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q10.
Question                            Acceptable Answers                                         Additional Guidance                   Mark
Number
An explanation that makes reference to:                      -            _                        oe
Accept references to re-emuission in all
° if photon enercy equal to an energy level                  directuons.
ditierence in the elements present (1)
° then the photon can be absorbed by an
electron and the electron 1s excrtedmowes
» 80 the absorption spectrum is created                                                                                     |
because the frequencies of the absorbed                                                                                     3
photons are missing from the contumuens
spectrum produced by the star (1)
Q1i1.
Ciuestiom,                           4        aa                                                        qlee            w                         ae
                            Acceptable answers                                              Aldlitional suidamce
(a)               e (UV radiation consists of) photons          (1) | Accept quanta/packets of energy
® (One photon imteracts with one
electron
(Or eneroy of photon depends on               (1)
® Electrons released if energy (of
photon) greater than work fiction.
(Ov frequency 1s greater than                  (1)
(Ov enerzy supplied is sufticient to
remove electron
(Question.                           4        dani                                                        4 ditt            id                         War
                                      Acceptable answers                                                              Additional sundance
(yc)          e when slider atthe bottom - readme
on voltmeter is zero
(On nom resistance - reaching
voltmeter 1s Zero                                              (1)
« When shder atthe top— reading
voltmeter is 1.5 °V
‘Or maximum resistance - reading on      |
voltmeter is 1.5 °V¥                           (1)
e Potential ditterence split between top
and bottom part of resistor (erther
aide of slider)
(Ov readme on voltmeter depends. cm
the ratio of pesistances (etther sale of
‘Ov moving the slider changes the
resistance that the voltmeter is across 1)


--- Page 53 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
                                 Acceptable answers                                                     Alditional guidance                       Mlaork
(bai) | Maximum Kinetic Energy of electron = 0.6     (1)
feV)                                                                                             1
Question            Acmanutatles werareane                  AAAtticanal aaniclarc:        face
                            Acceptable answers                                             Alditional suidamce                    Mlaork
(e)          Max 4                                                                         Full marks can only be: scored af a
comect hnkis made between at least
Walid because:                                                                          one physics point and the
demonstration bemg valod or not valod
® [Moon and photocell both have vacuum           (1)
® Both demonstration and theary use          (1) | Accept ithe Same COMOEpt for
photoelectric effect                 photoelecinec effect
Not walid because:
e Different wavelengths im each case        (1) | Accept one uses heht the other UW
® Om the moon there is dust not metal         @) | Accept citterent matemals for MP4
© Dwst is free to move but the metal plateis
e Om the moon UV removes electrons from
(tdivaedual) atoms amd
m the demo light removes electrons from            ,
metal surtace                                              (1)
® Demonstration is based on photoelectric      1
ettect but effect an moon could be               (1)
tomtom
Q12.
aie esto                                 Acceptable Amswers                                                            Additional Guidance                                      Mark.
Number
a a
Q13.
Cuestion                          Accreptahle Amswers,                                                        Additional guidance                         Marl:
Number
oe Useot® = hf andy = fa          (1) | Example of calculation
« Converts between eV to J           Q) | B=6.2e¥ x Léx LOC
conclusion that superradiance can     ,lE= 6.65% 10“ ]sx 3.0% 10° ms—
oCcuL                                          ty y°                            a
A= #101 nm so superradiance can occur             4


--- Page 54 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Qi4.
Cimestion                          Acceptable Amswers                                                        Additional guidance                         Marl
Number
e Afoms contam discrete energy
levels                                    (ly
® The atonwelectron loses enerry
and falls back down energy levels
eilitiing a photon                                             (0)
© withenercy equal to the difference * ”
in emersy levels                                           ea)
e Energy (or photon) is proportional =~ ©
bo frequency                                              (1)
® So emitted trequency or radiation
comesponids to the difference i
energy levels of a particular atom        1)                                                                                                5
ee
Q15.
Question | Amswrer                                                                                                    Ivlatk.
Incorrect Answers:
A not demonstrated by this observation
EB not demonstrated by this observation
(C oot demonstrated by this observation
Qi6.
                            Acceptable answers:                                              Additional ruidance
Number
ae       em                       Example of calculation                         4
* Substitute eF for 4 oom in df= g+          a)
36 WW mas       Af= d+ V4 mF nas
« Rearranges to identify gradient = hve        4     a if
« Attempt to find eracient using lange             .        = iife — gfe
frianele                                         Q) | sradient = hve
. B= 7Oe 10 Is                                     gradient = (2.40 V— 1.00 V)=
(range: 74% 1 Testo 7.7 x ii T                (6.075 x 10°" He -4.095 = 10   Hz
sradient = 4.72 x 10" Vs
A=4.72x 10" Vsx lex loc
h= 758% 10%] s


--- Page 55 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q17.
ee                      Acoeptable answers                                                   Additional enidamce:
(att)           oo                 Example of calculation
La         e Use ofd =/vp and v=fa       qg)
e Momentum of photon =3.3       |   Momentum of photon = p | — taf ‘e     ame
x 107" (Ns)                      ) | =6.63 x 10" Is* 15 105 He=3.00~ 10? m
                          et                                                      2
=3.315~10"MNs
smesmon                              Acceptable amswers                                              Additional guidance
Cali)                Ecf momentum from (7) in paris (avi)
_      © Momentum transfer = 6.6 x 1027 (N's)     a)    cf momentum ft mn (i) 1m parts (aia)
*          “1 aac (ic)                                      l
Question          ae ae                          ee ee                Taianlic
Number                        Acceptable answers                                                     Addlittiomal midlance                                    Mark
(byciy        —    ap            Example of calculation
e Ose of by = gr Yo IRV moa       (1)     hy = gor 4s HAV oan,
° Useof Ek =% mn           @   if ;  6.603 x 10"Ts*15* 10° He =9.95 = I
oe v=84x 10 @ms')          gy | 79 =9-93* 1OYJ—67*1o8I=3.25 x19 | 4
3.25 = 10" 7=%x91ix lO kx
v=84x10ms"
Suesmon                       Aoceptahle answers                                                       Additional guidamce
(Is ii)                                                                Example of calculation
e Use of =v                Q) |p =9.11 = 107 kex 84™ 10 ms"!       |
|              |                         Momentum of photoelectron = 7.68 x 10" Ns
® Momentum of                ay)                                                              2
oe =P                MP?: Using show that value p= 7.3 * 10° Ns
lure Ns
ee                                      Acceptable answers                                                       Additional cuidamce
«              An explanation that reters to the following
pots:
ie   the mer vineatecemen      (Il)    Accept converse statement and.
CRUE BS MMe Seine: a We Me Ul                answer that is consistent with
momentum of the photoelectron                           candidate's values in (a) and (b)
® so the (change in) momentum is much
larger tor the photoelectron than for the
reflected pliotan


--- Page 56 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Qi8.
Chiestiom                   Acceptable Amswers                                                                         Additional guidance             Mark
Number
Max 6
Similarities
e Anelectrom absorbs a photon
Or elecitons sain emeray trom a photon                (1)
o photons need a minimum amount of                 (i)
e 680 light must be above a certam              (iy
frequency
* increasing the light intensity increases
the aumber of electrons (released per                       em
Sec}
e Puidemoe tor the particle model of light                 (i)
Differences
® In the photoeclecttic eftect electrons are
Teleased trom the surface                                   (iy
o But electrons remain within the LDR          ci                                 i
eo Photoelectric effect occurs im metals                        as
Or LDR is a semiconductor            ()


--- Page 57 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Question      a                                             be TMehehee cD acocte                     Teen
Numb                                     Acceptable answers                                                    Additional guidance                       Wilaurle
The                      _                                                  _

-                  ;           ;                           oe                                  The following table shows low the marks
*             This question assesses a student's ability te                            should te awarded for sinactere and lines
 a coherent and logacaliy structured SLE                    of reasoning
with linkages and fullycustamed reasomime.                                                                                                  Muahber of marke
Marks are awarded for indicative content amd.                                                               a 7 ure wad line
for how the answer i2 stiractaed and shows lines                                                                           ae ees
ee             -                                                                                                                                            of TeAsOnIMe
Or TeaEORNe.                    —
.                   =                                                                                                     Anewer showe 2.                              2
The following table shows how the mace                                  cobercat aad     .
should he avvacded for amdicative content.                         sp gnee SEES
"                                                                              with linkage and.
Number | Numberof | Max        Max             ied ae |
of        antics       linkage      final deme . _ 4 ane
mdicative        awarded.             maak            mark                     she ual scout
markets       ‘far       available                     ————
points | indicative                                      Answer is partially
seen im    a cit -                                stnactuned wath,
       __ ; =                                     some linkages amd
—              _                                                                            lines of reasonine
linkage berreen.
Unstractiured
4 [sa ft [a
iGiuidsance on how the mark scheme should.
should le added to the mark for liner of
five indicative marking pomts which is
i                     i                      a                                           partially strchired with some linkages and.
*             *              “                           lines of reasommg scores 4 marke (3 marke
ry            o           -           for indicative content and | mark for
0                     0                       0                      0                      pactial. stnicture and some linkages amd.
hnes of reasomme). If there are oo linkages
between pots, the game five mdicatiwe
marine pomts would yield an overall.
score of 3 marks (3 marks tor indicative
content and no mates for lokazes ).
Tndicative content.
Dibservations
There ate 4 observations and 2 models.
® FPhotoelectrons emitted mstantanecously          Linkage is demonstrated by linking
when tadiation incident on surrace                     observations and models.
o There is mo photoemission below the           —          .          —_
threshold trequency                                                Two Bnkage marks can only be
a, 5  ee         aurarded if reference 13 made to both
eo The TSR ITVEL he ar the photoclectrons              models and more than one observation
1s imdependent of the intensity or ihe
incident radiahon,
o The rate of photoemission is
Proportional to the intensity of the
incident radiation
Ilodels
e (One photon is absorbed by one electnom
‘Or all of the energy of one photon is
transtened to one clecinom
o With wawes, eneroy can be supplied to
the electron continuously
‘Or with waves, enercy can “build wp*                                                                                              6


--- Page 58 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q20.
Juestion                Acceptable Answer            Additional Guidance        Mark
Number
» work function = hfs           (1) | Example of calculation
o use of hf = @+ Vomvemx (1) | work function = Afp
« division by 1.6 x 10°49        (1) | = 6.63 x 10° Js x 8.17
|                         x 10% Hz
o ¥Y=0.60V                    (i)                 -
= §.42 x 107")
Vo mW? ex
= (6.43 x 104 1s x 9.62
x 107 Hz) - 5.42
x 10-97
V= 0.60 V
Q21.
Question                                     ‘                                                    :
Tanaaatty ;                            Alswer                                 Mark
Number
1
The cnly correct answer is C because wave nature would predict
a Greater emission rate with a greater mcident power
A because imstantaneous emission is only predicted by particle mature
B because dependence of maximum kmetic energy on frequency is only predicted
by particle manure
D because minimum frequency for emission is only predicted by particle nature
Q22.
                            Acceptable Answer                                     Additional (cuidamce
The sindent’s answer should
© Include the idea that ‘threshold’ qj | For MP1, accept
refers to a (nimimum) frequency          that wavelength has
a       4                       to be below a
» state that photons have an          (ly         op       _
”      ,     en                      Los     eertain “threshold?
eneray given by hf                        certam “threshold
® reroomise that the enersy used      (1) | Max 3 if the                     4
to release electrons is called the                  Tespanise 1s not a
work tumcthon                                                discussion of the
° include the idea that one photon (1)    student's answet
is absorbed by one electron


--- Page 59 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q23.
ie atten   ce =P ta ble                                 Additional zuidance                    Marl:
Numlver     AS We                                                   =
DD              The only comect answer is D- a wave of sreater ttensity would still tramsfer                I
eMercy ata greater rate which could release photoelectrons ata greater tate
even it they could absorb energy continously
Ais mot comect because time would be required for absorption of sutiicient
Wave ELETEY
B is not comect because absorption of sutticient wave enercy would occur over
tie:
IC is mot comect because at higher imiensities the waves would have higher
amplitudes and enercy could imcrease over time: to higher values
Q24.
‘Question              L mmaritetalia A-weeeers                  Ate aval (antec «a     7
anata:                 Acceptable Amswer                   Additional tsuidance      Mark
Number
o Light consists of (particles called) (1)
photons
o These particles:
are discrete packets of eneroy
Or are quanta of energy                      (1)                                                              eo
Or have momentum
Q25.
Question     Answer                                                      Additional | Mark
Number                                                                     Guidance
® one photon interacts with one electron                             (1)
° when the evergy of the photon is equal toorgrester (1)
than the work function (of the metal) an electron is
released
° eneroy of photon = fy so there is a                                 .
mmm ‘threshold trequency                                         (1)
Q26.
Number
D visible lime spectra
Incorrect Answers:
A —wawe model
B— wave model
(C— wave model


--- Page 60 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                                              PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q27.
(mestiom           Acceptable Answers                                         Adchtional Guidance                                  Mark
Number
°    atoms! electrons          (1) | Answers in tems of emission spectrum can be
have           |                      awarded MP1, 4.and 5
nized chiscrete/spe
cific eneray levels
© electrons get                1
excited by             @)
absorbing photons                                                                                                                         5
° enensy of photon         (1)
absorbed =             ad
diitterence 1m
enerey levels
® omby certain                 _.
possible, so only
certain plaobom
enermes absorbed
so only centaim
frequencies
TequeLuicies
absorbed depends,
om the clement
Q28.
(Question                                          |          _                                                          Additonal,
ia  ‘                                            Acceptable answers -  :   -_       Mlarle
Number                                                  |                                                                   TW AMOS:
The ealy comect answer is A because, using Eansteim’s                                                                   1
photoelectric equation, Af=.@ + oma, since the work function
1s constant, an wcrease in frequency results m an imecrease im the
masini kinetic enersy of the photoelectrons
Bis not comect because, using Eimstem's photoelectric equation, Ay
=o 4 erm, intensity has no effect on the maximum kinetic
energy of the photoelectrons, just the tate at which they are emutted
iC is not comect because , using Eimstem’s photoelectric equation, hf
=o 4 noo, and since the work function is equal to (the Plamel
constant * threshold frequency), a ligher threshold trequency wall
lead to a lower main kinetic eneray of the photoelectrons
Das not comect because, using Eimstem’s photeclectnic equation, hy
=o 46 poms, a higher work fanction will lead to a lower
marin kinetic enerey of the photoelectrons
Q29.
Quesiion.          Ame mer                                                                                                                          Ivhark
Tocerrect Amaarers:
A—absorphon of the longest wavelensth
B — emission with the longest wavelengii
( — absorption of the shortest wavelength


--- Page 61 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Number                       Acceptable answers                                           Additional emidamce                          Wark
*          .-        .                 a                 The tollowine table shows how ihe marks should
Thus question assesses a student's                    be awarded for structure and lines of reasoning
abalaty to show a cobberent auc                                                                                                                      |
logically structured answer wath                                       a a
linkages ancl fully-sustamed                                                                                                 Numer a marks
TeAsoMinNe.                                                                              structure of answer
Nadarks ave awarded for mcdacative                                                                                anid sustained lime
combent and for how ihe answer 13                                              ;                                   ot TeasOring
shuctured and shows lines of                      AMsWer shows a                   2
TEAS.                                                                       coherent and logical
|                                              structure wath
The following table shows how the                       linkages and fully
marks should be awarded for                                   sustained lines of
tmlicative content.                                                        reasoning demonstrated
throughout
Number of     Nuaiber of marks      Answer 1s partially           i
indicative marking            awarded for                       structured with some
points seem in         indicative marking                linkages and limes of
aS Wer                 pots                 reasons
between pomts amd is
Indicative content
e This 15.2 dittraction/mterterence
pattem
. Electrons behave as waves               PP? De not credit “electrons behawe as waves or
@ Dlecirons DeHane aS WANES                    particles® on its own
_                  ;               ;                 PPS accept circles get condensed tor cucles get
o As speedimomentum mereases the                 emaller
circles get smaller
om     be te a kw           PP4 do mot credit use of equation to justify A
° ~ om used to justify that as 6                 SANG S120 as taps im crystal or to measure the
HeCReases 4 CeCrcases                                      gape im the sraphite                                                         i
o Reters de Broghe equation (A = fp) te
contiro that as speedmomentum
eases, wavelength decreases                  PPé small gaps at uniiorrn distances/lengths Or
accept that sraphite is made wp of more than a
« (Crystal has a.regulanlayered stmucture             single crystal


--- Page 62 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q31.
                                 Acceptable answers                                                      Additional guidance
(a)         °o The electrons/atoms can only
exist im, ciscrete!specific emery     (1)
levels (an the sodium atoms)      ws
o Flectronefatams become
Or Electrons/stoms mowe to
higher enerey levels                            a)
® ‘The electronsatoms then move
to lower energy lewels, civing = (1)
out enercy im the fon ot
photons
o The energy of the photon is                              acceptl = he sk
equal to the energy diiterence
between the enerzy levels                  dy
MP6 — Allow teteremce to Tew or
ee age ga ee                      limited mumtber for “certain”. Allonar         -
° f= if and A= aif so     |                    reference to discrete differences im.            "
wavelength depends on the                             energy levels.
photon enerey                                        Cy                     ,
0 There are only certam enersy
transitions possible (between
discrete levels) so only certam (1)
trequencies/wavelengths. are
wisible.
oo     oe                                  Example o calculation
(ii) | ° Useotmt — dame                          @) |3*589* 107% m=dsin 90°
e d@=1.77*10%m                            qy | @— ifs 10m
o (Choose d= 2.0 « 107° m as a smaller                                                                                |
value than. d= 1.77 * 10% mm would                                                                        4
Cause sreater diftirachion angles so the
third. order would mot be seen, but 3.5               :
x 10 m would produce smaller                   Ql)
angles than 2.0 * 107 m, causing
larger relative uncertainty im                                 .
MEAS UTE MENT                                (I)
e OUseoftrd = dsiné
e A contect value ofsin 6 or
a@=10=10°m > 177
d=1.7 "10% m > 104
d=20= 10m >0.828 62.°
d=339% 10m 30535 32°                 ql)
® (Choose d=2.0™% 10m 1.7 * 1047 m
would give a sine value greater than 1,
so mo 3" onder is visible, and 3.3 x
10? m would produce smaller angles           qd)
than 2.0 = 107 m, causing larger
telative Uncertainty in measIneMenit


--- Page 63 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                                              PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q32.
Number                                 Acceptable Anstrer                                              Additional (2uidance                     Mark.
(i                               1 o«a 6 6S                                    Example of calculation:
®            e OUseor —mic ) =—AF                  a)
a= gt            re         1 all 2 _3 ET
« mean lkineticencray —6.4%107    (I)     ame i-3"
=5x138x10M IK x3100K=642x10"3 |
Number                           Acceptable Answer                                    Additional Guidamce               Wark.
i(ii)              ® There are electron transitions                @
between enercy levels in the atoms,
@ Wheno electrons refom to a. lower           (Ip
level they enut enenzy m the fom of
photons                                                                                                                                       z
Question                                            Additional         1
Number                                                                            Acceptable answers                                                                     guidance      Mark
This question assesses a student’s ability to show a coherent and logically
structured answer with linkages and fully-sustained reasoning. Total marks
awarded ts the sum of marks for indicative content and the marks for structure
and lines of reasoning
  Max structure mark) Max final mark
| 6 | 4 | 2 |
Pp o2 | 2 |
a ee ee
Marks are awarded for indicative content and for
how the answer is structured and shows lines of
reasoning.
The following table shows how the marks should be
awarded for indicative content.
|                                  Nunber of
                                                                         miarks
Number of — | Number of’                                                                  anne to
‘indicative     marks awarded                           saswer ad
marking             for indicative                                                                line of
points sccnin | ma rking points                  Answer shows a coberent and °        a    .
answer                                                                                                     logical sanscture sith Hnkages.
6 a
;             reasoning demonstratest |
              throahont
p32
ied                    =                            With some linkages and lines of
rs
;                                                -              between points and is                   .
 einstrecnured:                                         .
IC5 and 1C6 can be awarded if suitable equations with
terms explained are used


--- Page 64 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Indicative comtent:
ICl =- Electrons in neon atoms/molecules absorb enercy due to electron
collisions
(Or neon atoms/molecules absorh due to electron collisions
IC? = - Electrons im neon atemsfmolecules move to higher enerey levels/states
(Or Electrons m neon atoms'molecules are excited
(Or Neon atoms/molecules are excited
ICS A jloten is released when an electron drops down enercy levels
‘Or A photon 1s released when an atome/electron de-excites
C4 Elecirons/atoms/molecules have discrete energy levels/states
ICS Frequency wavelength (of enutted photon) 1s determined by difference im.
energy levels/states
(Or Ao; = hf where is fis frequency
1C6 = Limited amber of possible energy levels/states, and so only
cette particularspecific frequencies! wavelengths are emutied
(Or Choy cettam energy changes possible, and so only
cettam particularspecific frequencies! wavelengths are emutied
Q34.
1g             na         For MP1 and MP? allow
°  lo hsher casey   (1) | o  Electrons inock electrons out of
states. / levels (by                low Smerey levels     a
incident electrons)                   o   Electrons cascade down to ill wp
the levels
o   An electron returns     a)
to the lower energy      -
state / level resulting
im fhe emission of a
photon                                                                     4
© The enerey of the       1
photon is equal to      w)
the difference of the
energy states / levels
o Large ditterence m        ()
enerey states / lewels         .
so as 2 = Af,
rathation is high
irequency


--- Page 65 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q35.
Cuestiom | yen te mcmeecetes                                A didtetearal avid:           alle
 Acceptable answers                                  Additional cuidance          Marks
O |.  (4oving) electrons collide with,         (1)
latiice/ioms
* Tramster ofenersy to (lattice) ions so   (1)                             4
they vibrate with larger amplitude/speed
(and the teniperature imcreases)
(i)                                               em mgs        |
@ Electrons/ions in the tube collide with                       Mention of work mmoction scores 0
mercury phosphor atoms and excite            qd)
electrons (im the mercury phosphor                    )
atoms)                                                                                 MP2 Allow de-excite for mowe back
iq, | dover
,       ae ah     -        (1)                                        4
@® Perey is released im the form of                                                  7
photons as the electrons move back
down (fo the ground state)
Q36.
Cuestion | Ams wer                                                                      Ivlatk.
QLD 0 ee
Incorrect Ame wrers:
A Tocomect valwe for
B Tooorrect arrangement and imcomect value tor f
I) Incomect arrangement
Q37.
Question      Answer                                                                    Mark
Aimer
po B sround state to level 2
Tacerrect Answers:
A—imeorrect change im enery
—imoorect change in eneroy and direction
D— incorrect direction


--- Page 66 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q38.
orn             Acceptable Answer      Additional Guidance     Mark
Number
e the atoms have             (1)
discrete energy levels
° atoms gain energy amd (1)
get excited / electrons
move to higher energy
levels
° atoms/electrons move     (1)
to lower energy levels
and emit energy as
photons
° different energy             (1)
changes cause
photons with ditterent
frequencies; wavelengt
ns
Q39.
Muri                                                                                                                              guidance
i    ve      7                         Guidance on how
This question BSSESSES a                    the mark scheme
student's ability to show a      |        should be
coherent a nd logically structured         applied: The
answer with linkages and fully-          mark for
sustained reasoning.                                      indicative content
Marks are awarded for indicative        should be added
content and for how the answer is      to the mark for
structured and shows lines of            lines of
reasoning.                                                                            reasoning. For
example, an
The following table shows how           answer with tive
the marks should be awarded for        indicative
indicative                                marking points
content,                                     which is partially
structured with


--- Page 67 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Number ot          Number af           some linkages
indicative           marks awarded      ane lines of
marking points    ror indicative        reasoning scores
seen in answer | marking points      A marks (3 marks

i           content and i
structure and
,               ane lines of
linkages between
points, the sane
jive indicative
marking points
would yield an
Le eM eke che ke          owerall score of 3
The rollowing table Shows how          marks (3 marks
th ema rks shou ld be awarded ror       for indicative
structure and lines of reasoning.        content and no
Number of              marks Tor
marks awarded           linkages}.
for struchure of
answer and
sustained line
of reasoning
Answer shows a
coherent amd
logical structure
with linkages and                   ~
Tully sustained                                é
lines of reasoning
demonstrated
throughout
Answer is
partially
structured with                     i
some linkages                            :
and lines of
reasoning
Answer has mea
points and is                       ~                                           (6)
unstructured
Indicative content
e electrons/atoms move to higher
energy levels
Or electrons/atoms are ewcited
« they then move to lower energy
lewels (accept ground state) and the
energy (from the change) is given
out in the form of a photon


--- Page 68 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
® the energy levels are discrete
Or only certain energy levels are
possible
e the energy of the photon is equal to     looking for eneray
the difference in energy levels            differences:       .
Or hf = —: — Ey Or hcfA = E2— Ey | fchanges not
® there are only a limited number af      energy levels
energy differences and only a                       /
corresponding set of
frequencies/ wavelengths
e ditterent elements hawe different
energy level (differences), so they
will produce different
frequencies; wavelengths
Q40.
Question                                             Answer                                             Mark
TD shortest arrow pointing to ground state
Incorrect Answers:
A — shortest wavelencth absorbed
B — longest wavelength absorbed
( — shortest wavelength emutted
Q41.
Question                            Acceptable Answers                                         Additional Guidance                   Mark.
Number
atm        .             _                 HKzxample of calculation:
o weof difference m energy levels in eV and                   ®              |
use of = OF tor conversion to Joule (1)             difference in energy levels
> wmeofkebe                                         =0.55 eV — (0.85 eV)=0.3 eV
° usc of B= iy (I)                                      =03.V* 16x 10 C=4.8 x 102
o frequency = 7.2 * 104 Hz (1)                             J                                                                a
fr4x 10 T+ 6.63 x 1054 Is                    3
=7.2 x 108 Hz
Q42.
Question                        Acceptable answers                                            Additional guidance                          Wille
Mumolver
® Use ot E = hfanle =            (1) | Example of calculation
o Convert Jto eV                  ‘       E=6.63 10 Js 3.00* 10 mes! /
o JleV                           —       5.89% 107 m
o Arrow drown on diagram irom        = 3 38x Loy                                 |
3.4 &V to 5.14 eV            @)       a         4
3.38 x10 Tf 10 « lo Ce =2 11 eV


--- Page 69 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q43.
Question      Answer                                                             Additional | Mark
Number                                                                              Guidance

electron falls back down energy levels emitting a photon (1)
wavelenath (ot photon) is mversely proportional to the
eneroy change                                                                            ey
refers to energy transition n=3 to n=—2 or n=? to m—1          ey

Q44.

‘Question: | Answer                                                       -          | Mark

Mumber                                                                                  |.
a
Q45.
Choestoom      Anarer                                                                             Tilak
Number

A—amount of energy of a photon needed to release an electron
Tocerrect Answers:
B- an electron does not release a photon
C— reference to frequency imeorrect
D -reterence to frequency mcomect and electron does not release a photon


--- Page 70 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q46.
Question          ccentable aucwer               Addftscral emid-amee      Wifes
wy               Acceptable amswers                    Adchtional gundance         Mark
Number
® Use otEy =p / 2m             (1) | MP1 accept use of p = mv aml Use
of FE, = nn
o Use ots = hfe                  (1) | MP4 accept (t+ 4) 4 orn a
respectively
oe A=5.0~ 10 (mm) calculated     ) | ceemmmte of cateutae
frown Fhe                          | Example of caleulation
Or                                              p=W2* 9.11 = 107 ke 9.6 x
Ex =9.7 x 107 calculated fro         1D
A=5.0 * 107 mm                         p=132* 10% kems*      |
Orr                                           A =6.63 x 10 Js / 1.32 *% 10 ke
p=13x 10" (kgms")              ug
calculated tram, i aml                        A=3.0* 10M m
p=13~10" (kems")                                                                        |
calculated from 4 =3.0 « LO" om                                                        6
oe jpath difference at A as Af?        qd)
Or path difference at ¥ 1s 4       _
o (electron) waves at X are im      (1)
antiphase                       ws
Or (electron) waves at ¥ are im
phase
° at X destructive                 qd)
imfterference/superposition takes ~~
place
Or at ¥ constructive
interference/superposition takes
place
Q47.
                             Acceptable Answer                                      Additional Gundamce
© Photoelectric equation stated m
words                                             (1) | MPI: Accept fy for ¢ [ath ja
Or hf =¢                                             defined], and Eye for = MV
+5 nve.with ¢
                                                          MP2: eV, does not
Tama al? — bf                    have to be the subject
°   Hence aus = hy 7 é              (1) | of the equation
OF Foz = Af — @ amd Bp max      )
=e,
© Compare with y = mx +c        (1)
             ——      ae                                            5
° So plota eraph of F. agamet f          (1)
Or plot a sraph of eF, agamst jf    -     MPS is denendent
     “          |      |           MPS is dependent
oa,       ik                     _    upon Tih.
® Gradient = —                    (1)     P
e
Or eracdient =f


--- Page 71 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q48.
Question                    |                            Additional
Q  oe           Acceptable answers                “vatclieg us   Mark
Number                                                                                                                          quidance
the lowest frequency (or incident
radiation) that will cause the emission
of (phoetojelectrons (irom the suriace)
Question   |    |                     pepe         |
Q  ee    Acceptable answers            Additional guidance      Mark
Number
(by)      0 Use 07 0) Vmax (1) | Example of calculation:
e Use of @ = hr—     (1) | 10"Hz=5.9 2 10")
max ke
Vo 17 Vinx = Me = O11 =
o divides energyin (1) | 10“ kg x (6.7 * items
joule by 1.6 *             NWF= 7.045 x 10°]
io? c                    @e=5.9 x 107 ]- 2.045
x1" 1] = 3.8 x io]
o m= 2.4 eV         (1)
=18“10"1]+16*i10
= 7.4 eV                      (4)
Q49.
duestion                                   Acceptable Answer                                             Additional (suidamce                Afar
Nimober
e The deflection/fields experiments                    To MP1 allow a description of
indicate that electrons have amass (anid a              deflection ¢.¢. electrons are
charse)                                                                                     deflected by (electric and
‘Or the deflectionfields experments               (1) | magnetic) fields mvclcatme that
indicate that electrons have particle                               they have amass (and charge)                      3
behawiour.
® The dittraction experiments mcicate that (1)
electrons must have a wave nature                      |
e [dea that.a model of electron behaviour          i)
must mclude wave-particle duality


--- Page 72 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q50.
Question       Amswer                                                     Additional Guidance          Mark
Number
0 Use ofa = -                             Example of calculation
Either                                         h=14™ 10°" mx 4.8 «10-7 ke ms"
°o h=6.7 x 107** (Is)            h=6.7 10     Is*¥ 6.63 210° °" Ts
o COMPAS answer
to 6.63 * 107** (Is)
0 A=138=10" @
o chmpares answer to
140% 10" (im
Q51.
Question     a                                      he Tdtetice el) coche                      —
                 Acceptable answers                                     Additional euidance
ae ge                             Frample of calculation
* Use of gradent                    (1) | gradient = 3.00 x 10°" T=
© hfvomgraph=6.74x 10% Is   Ome
« Suitable perentage calculation.                       __
allowing comparison with 1%            percentage ditterence        a.
andl coaclusion                                   = (iG 74 x io Js-—6.85 x 10" Ts)
(1) | 6.63 * 10" Is ™ 100%
= 1.66% which is greater tham 1 0 if is mot
within 1%
6.63 x 107 Ts * 101% = 6.70% 10 Ts
which is smaller than 4.74 * 10°" I sso itis
not within 1%                                                                a
Q52.
Question                          Acceptable Anstrers                                                            Adlditional guidance                         Iiilark.
Number
e Use of p = mp using mass of        (i)   Exam ole ot Calculation :
electron                                         |       ae            6.63 x 10-* Js
« Useofa=—                             () | ° oa1x io kg x 22 x10" ms        3
2 A=33~xi107" m                       (i    A= 3.5 4 10    m


--- Page 73 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q53.
Number
® Electrons existin discrete (1)
energy levels                                      Accept excited state for higher energy
o (Atterihe mercury atomis (1)   level          a
om                           Accept sround state for lower eneray
excited) electrons move                    state
back to a lower energy
(Or (Atter the mercury
atom is excited) electrons
move back, AV A
higher eneray level                                                                                                                                       x
6 Photons are emutied           (1)                                                     =
o Frequency of ented         (1)
radiation / photons
depends on the difference
in eneroy between the
energy levels
Or reference to AR = hf
o Simce there are only           (1)
cettam enerey changes
possible, only certam.
frequencies are possible
Q54.
(i)            o Useafa—2                                  (1) | Example of calculation
* feoogsnise A= 2x diameter of         1)         S63 M10-2* (] 2       _       sa
abom                             i   P= Sages fay 7 LOTX 10% eg          3
o 17x 10774 ke m st gl
(ai)         o A discrete number of half
wavelengths fit into the diameter of (1)
atl abo
e Reference to f= to Link:             (1)                                                          2
wavelength to discrete anersy
levels


--- Page 74 ---

Particle Nature of Light and The Wave-Particle Duality                                     PhysicsAndMaths Tutor.com
Q55.
Question      Answer                                                                Mark
Wiumnolver
A Using oA-ilsin.@                                                        1
Number of slits per mm in the                       Wavelength of the light source
Hittraction srating
Incorrect Answers:
B— wavelength decteasmg would cause d to decrease
C—oumber of slits'nm decreasme would cause @ to decrease
D both dectessing causes @ to decrease
Q56.
Questia m
at.          Acceptable answers                 Additional guidance       .
Number
® Line of beet fit drawen                              (1) | Example of calculation,                                4
® Gracent detenmmed               (1)  Gradient = 4, l4x io*        .
a wee      ~ og        (1) | #=4l4x lo e¥sxLéx io’ Jey"
® Anplies eV to J comversion factor      (ty | za
_.    mp ene      _.       _. gy, |= ete « 10 Ts
o f= 662% 10"%Is(64« 10" Jsi6.8 WM
x 0FF* Ts)
MP4 dependent on calculation from, eraph
Q57.
Question
mr.             Acceptable answers                         Additional guidance
Number
® ximtercept detenmined           (1)   MP2: allow use of standard         3
o Useof é-hf               (1) | value for 4 or
o g=2.3 eV. so metal is (probably)                   value of 4 determined im (a)
caesium (allow ecf for 4 trom (ay)            q)        Example of calculation
|                                          fo=55 %10"* He
OR                                                                               = 6.62x10™ Is x55x10" Hz
® Reads a paw of co-ordinates trom eraph                 =3 @4x ifr J
o Useof @=—hf—E       3.64% 10777]       328 ev
o g@=2.3 eV, so metal is (probably)           °=Texio-2 jewn eee
cacsmum (allow ecf for 4 from (a)
